Well, good afternoon,
ladies and gentlemen.
Welcome to the
QuickTime feedback session.
If you really want the
QuickTime feedback session,
though, you shouldn't be in here.
You should be in the
room right behind us,
the marina.
So does anybody want to take this
opportunity to get up and leave?
Okay, so welcome to the FireWire
Reference Platform session.
My name is Colin Whitby-Strevens,
and I speak with an English accent.
So this is really just a few words
for you to get yourself calibrated
to listening to an English accent.
The other thing I should perhaps
warn you about is that when
I get excited about technology,
I tend to speak faster and faster,
so you may have to slow me down as well,
or else it'll be totally impossible
to understand what I'm saying.
So what I'm intending to tell you
about over the next hour or so is
to give you an overview of what
the FireWire Reference Platform is,
and then to tell you in some detail
about two or three of its components.
In particular,
I'm going to tell you about
something called TNF Kernel,
which is the heart of it.
TNF Sys, TNF Link Drivers.
This is the heart of the platform.
I'm going to be giving two examples
of the code which is included in the
platform for supporting protocols,
FireWire protocols.
There are many protocols
supported in the platform,
and these are really just two examples.
and TNF gets used very
frequently in this presentation.
And what it means is just
a little acronym for 1394.
So we talk about TNF this,
TNF that all the time.
And you'll find that all the APIs have
got the letters TNF at the beginning.
And that really was just a little
attempt to make sure we didn't get
nasty name clashes and the like.
But just to say that really the
objective I have this afternoon
is not to train you in every fine
detail of the reference platform,
but to give you a flavor
of how it is constructed,
how it is architected,
and how you can use it,
and how you might go about
building your applications using
the TNF reference platform.
So, what is it?
Well, in a single sentence,
the reference platform is the
source code and documentation for
a pile of software which enables
you to develop what we might call
end-of-the-wire FireWire devices.
So these are products that you
would like to build which are
complementary to the main Mac products.
This also means that this software is
not related to other Apple operating
system FireWire stack software.
It is independent of that,
and it's intended to be freestanding
in end-of-the-wire products.
Indeed, it's been designed very much
with the embedded system in mind.
It needs some form of
real-time operating system,
but really its requirements on real-time
operating system are pretty small,
and a lightweight real-time
operating system will do.
There are a variety of
RTOSs that are supported,
and there's a very easy way of
porting it to other RTOSs as well.
It also supports a variety
of 1394 link chips.
You may be aware that in
a computer like a Mac,
you find a link chip
which is called OHCI,
Open Host Controller Interface.
And that is very much a chip which is
optimized to use in that sort of device,
in a Mac of some sort.
But there are many other
link chips around which are,
again,
optimized towards embedded applications.
And the FireWire Reference
Platform really is designed to be equally
suitable for use in an OHCI environment
or in other link chip environments.
So there are several drivers provided,
and in essence there's a kit
provided which you can use in order
to drive other 1394 link chips.
But the great thing about it
is that it supports multiple
FireWire application protocols,
and it supports them simultaneously,
in that you can build an
application which requires,
in order to work properly,
several different FireWire
application protocols,
and you can have those all running
simultaneously within your application
using the reference platform.
So, what actually is in the box,
or when you go and download from the web,
what do you find?
Well, first of all,
you find some software for a number of
modules which we call the class services.
The heart of the whole system
is a thing called the kernel,
TNF kernel.
There are then some services
for supporting different
classes of protocols.
One, the main one,
first one we mention here is AVC General.
The audio-visual control protocols
is a large family of protocols
that have been standardized
by the 1394 Trade Association.
We provide the support for all of those,
the general underlying
support for all of those,
and then we provide
specific protocols for disk,
DVD, panel, and tape sub-units.
We provide software for
asynchronous connections.
That's a method of streaming
data from one device to another,
but by using asynchronous operations.
That again is a standardized protocol.
We provide support for
something called EIA-775,
which is an EIA protocol for
on-screen display for digital TVs.
We provide IP 1394,
in particular RFC 2734, which is IPv4.
PPDT,
point-to-point data transport protocol,
and last but not least, SPP2,
which is a protocol specifically
for devices like disks and printers.
You'll find all of those in the
FireWire Reference Platform.
For RTOS interfaces,
there's a module called TNF-SYS,
which is the module which,
a single module,
which provides the RTOS independence.
And we provide
TNF-SYS implementations for VxWorks,
MicroiTron, Nucleus,
a rather early version of MicroCOS,
and there's also a generic
template so that you can port
to your own favorite RTOS.
We provide a board support package
so that you can bring up the whole of
the FireWire Reference Platform and
actually make it tick and do something,
even though it may not be working
on your particular hardware.
And that's been engineered around a
standard PC x86 platform with VxWorks.
For link drivers,
you find link drivers for OHCI,
for the Texas Instruments
CE-Links and GP-Links,
for the MD8412,
and also a generic link driver toolkit.
The link driver also
features some plug-ins,
because quite often you have some
specialized hardware that you also want
to be able to access at the driver level.
And in particular,
there's a couple of examples.
One is for the global unique identifier,
which will be implemented in a
system-dependent way in your hardware.
And the other one is for DMA features.
In order to exercise
this pile of software,
we have a generic command line interface,
which is called ZShell.
Using ZShell, we then provide a number of
little command-line applications,
which essentially implement
various 1394 transactions,
exercise various protocols, and so on.
There's a generic one called TMA,
and when you get to use the
FireWire Reference Platform,
you probably find yourself
using TMA really quite a lot.
It's a rather low-level thing,
but it allows you to directly
generate 1394 transactions on a bus
so that you can do reads and writes.
You can go and view devices.
You can find out what's on the bus.
You can find out which devices route,
and so on and so forth.
You can generate bus resets by typing
appropriate command lines commands at it.
There are then command-line applications
for an AVC tape controller and target.
In other words,
you can pretend to be an AVC tape
controller and give the sorts of commands
that an AVC tape controller will do,
or you can pretend to
be an AVC tape target.
There's somewhat embryonic,
but it's there, a 1394 bridge manager.
That's in anticipation
of the 1394.1 standard,
which is still not yet finished.
AVC disk controller and target, DVD,
PBDT, SPP2 disk, et cetera.
There are a few others as well.
All of these are rather low-level.
There are other low-level ways of
exercising these functions from
the FireWire Reference Platform.
We also have a number of
demonstration applications built
into the reference platform.
There's one for the on-screen
display features of EIA-775
for digital televisions.
There's actually a couple of applications
for personal video recorders,
essentially emulating a
tape recorder using a disc.
There's some demonstration of IP3094,
AVC panel.
There's another PVR application which
is really using AVC disk directly,
SVP2 disk, SVP2 initiator,
where you're on the host
side controlling a disk,
and some more.
So a whole range of
demonstration applications which,
with a bit of luck,
you ought to be able to get up
and running really quite quickly.
Again, to sort of get you started,
get you with the right sort
of feel for what it's like to
either drive or to implement a
FireWire end-of-the-wire device.
And of course,
there's a ton of documentation.
I actually went through and
counted that there's a total of
20 PDF manuals in this thing,
and also various release notes
with the various modules.
And then there's a whole
lot of assorted other things
which are helpful and useful,
like make files and various other
little tools all bound up in it.
and all comes in a tile.
Now, the architecture of all of this
is given in this slide.
The heart of it all, as I said,
is TNF Kernel.
TNF Kernel provides transaction
services for the 1394 bus.
It operates on a client-server model,
so it can support a number of clients.
And the client, if you like,
logs into TNF Kernel, gets some IDs,
and then does what it wants to do.
And so examples of clients are
our protocols to support SPP2,
or our protocols to support AVC, IP1394,
or whatever.
TNF Kernel also includes some
bus management utilities,
which in fact operate as clients as well.
So you can have any number of clients,
and this is extensible.
You can invent your own
clients if you like.
Then each of our protocols actually
operates in the same sort of model.
Each protocol itself can
have one or more clients.
So we have some software to
support disks and printers,
for example, which run on top of SPP2.
AVC,
we've got some software modules which
support very specific AVC devices.
On top of all of this,
you build then your application.
And in general,
you will use the interfaces sort
of up here to the particular
protocols that you want to support.
[Transcript missing]
So let's start peeling
the onion a little bit,
tell you a little bit more about
two or three of these modules.
As I said, really,
the objective here is not to
give you every last detail,
but to give you a flavor of how
these things are constructed,
how they're used,
and how you can build an
application with them.
And we start off with TNF Kernel.
So the main features of TNF Kernel.
First of all, it provides transaction
support for 1394 operations.
And a FireWire transaction is
something like a read or a write.
So you get quad-lit reads,
quad-lit writes, block reads,
block writes to other devices on the bus.
And this is actually both
incoming and outgoing,
so other devices on the bus can send
reads and writes to your device.
And Kernel will pick up
those reads and writes,
and will decide what to do with them.
It has command and indication queues.
So if you like the model,
as far as you're concerned,
as far as the clients
of Kernel are concerned,
are that several transactions can
be outstanding at the same time.
You know that's a nice
feature of FireWire.
It's very good for bus efficiency
that you don't have to wait for one
transaction to finish before another
one can start with split transactions.
And Kernel supports that.
Indication queues are essentially
the queues for the request
transactions that are coming into
this device from across the bus.
And of course,
if you get a request coming in,
like a read request,
you need to generate a response.
So there's the response generation.
And you can also sign up for the handlers
so that you can see the requests and
generate the appropriate responses.
So essentially,
everything you need in order to
be able to do normal 1394 bus
transactions is in TNF Kernel.
And of course,
it does a whole lot of nice things to
make sure that these transactions are
properly formatted and you get them right
and they are dealt with correctly across
bus resets and a few things like that.
It sort of deals with some
nitty-gritty issues of that sort.
Second feature in TNF Kernel
is bus management functions.
Main function of bus management
is to do things like optimize
the bus by optimizing gap counts,
making sure that the most capable node
on the bus is indeed the bus manager,
and so on.
So we provide serial bus management.
And by and large, that's autonomous.
You just say to the kernel,
I want you to be bus manager capable.
And it'll go and do it.
And you don't have to
worry about it again.
CSR services.
There's this wonderful misnomer in
1394 which is called configuration ROM,
which is always changing.
Essentially,
the configuration ROM is an area
in your address space where you
advertise to the outside world
what you're capable of doing.
This can be built up dynamically
using kernel services.
You can say,
I want a configuration ROM that
says I'm an SVP2 target,
and kernel will go away and build
the right sort of configuration ROM,
taking into account the fact that
some other client of kernel has
also asked for something else to
be advertised in configuration ROM.
The configuration ROM specification
has got a complicated structure
of pointers and the like,
and the kernel will build the
right structure given all the
requests that have been made of it.
And you can go and add capabilities
dynamically if you wish to.
Sort of complementary to
that are reset services.
A bus reset on FireWire is essentially
the hint that something's changed.
There's a new device on the bus.
Perhaps the device has gone
away that used to be there.
Or perhaps a device that's on the bus,
was there before, has actually changed
what it can and can't do.
It's got an extra capability or
maybe a capability that's gone away.
So there's a bus reset on the bus,
and that's sort of a hint for
everybody else to go out and
look at the configuration ROMs,
see what's changed,
and then understand what
the bus now looks like.
And there's a whole pile of
reset services which deal with
that for you in TNF Kernel.
Now, one of the ways that Kernel
helps the application is that
it provides a device reference,
which is not the PHYID.
It's not the node number on the bus,
because actually the node
number changes every time,
or can change every time
you have a bus reset.
What Kernel has is a device reference,
which it holds constant.
So by and large,
when you want to go and talk
to a device across the bus,
you don't say,
I want to send it to node number five.
You say, I want to send it to
this device reference.
And Kernel maintains track of what
node number is the correct node
number for this particular device
reference at this moment in time.
So it looks after all of that
sort of stuff for you as well.
What I've talked about
so far has basically been
looking after the aspects of
asynchronous transactions,
the ones that use the
memory address space.
But there's a whole lot of isochronous
services as well provided by Kernel.
Again, as part of serial bus management,
there's a thing called the
isochronous resource manager,
which tracks what
channels are being used,
what bandwidth has been used,
what's available to be allocated.
And TNF Kernel provides the
isochronous resource manager function.
It provides support for something
called function control protocol.
This is a protocol defined in IEC 61883,
which is the basis for all of the
AVC protocols and some others as well.
So the basic function control protocol
support is implemented in TNF Kernel.
There are isochronous services for
doing isochronous transactions.
So depending on the
nature of your link chip,
you can send and receive
isochronous packets.
Some link chips,
this may sort of go completely
through hardware to a side port
and kernel needn't get in the way.
For other link chips,
it may well be that software
gets involved at a fairly
low level with sending and
receiving of isochronous packets.
And basically,
the isochronous services that you
need are provided in TNF Kernel.
Then there are wonderful
things called plugs,
which is a way of managing the
isochronous channels on FireWire.
And we provide input output.
And output plug handlers and plug input
and output plug management for FireWire.
That again is defined in IEC 61883.
So, looking at how all this fits
in with the rest of the system,
here's kernel.
We basically have three main APIs.
We have a protocol client API,
which goes to these clients,
mainly the ones implementing
specific protocols.
We have a system services API,
and we have a kernel
services link driver API.
Text to go with previous file.
So just a moment or two
sort of on the marketing.
When are you going to use TNF kernel?
When is this sort of
thing going to be useful?
Well, what does it do for you?
The main thing it does for you is
indeed to abstract a whole lot of
nitty-gritty details of what it
is to be a good citizen on 1394.
And it abstracts that from the clients.
In other words,
it looks after that for you.
So there's actually quite a lot in
FireWire which you have to get right.
And it's great just to go with
TNF kernel because then you know
there's a pile of well-proven software
which is going to get it right for you.
You don't have to worry too much.
We isolate all the hardware-specific
code to the particular link driver.
So all the APIs that are
at the top of TNF kernel,
all the client APIs,
are essentially independent of
whatever link chip might be underneath.
So you may well be able to develop
some software which is generic
across a range of products,
or across an evolving
sequence of products,
which may well have new and
different and improved link chips.
And your application software is
protected against those changes.
It'll stay the same.
And of course,
the same thing goes for different
RTOSes and different hardware.
You can recompile and
go to a different CPU.
You can move all your software
onto a different RTOS.
So again, you may well have a family of
products of different complexities,
which for good reasons
have different RTOSes.
And still,
your application can look the same.
It can look and feel the same.
So there's both a support advantage
and a usability advantage.
So going into the architecture
in a little bit more detail,
we find ourselves with
initialization services,
reset services, our Sokka services,
CSR services,
and then various queues and clients,
which essentially take you directly from
the client APIs down to the link driver,
or in the other direction,
as the case may be.
So first of all,
a word on the link driver.
I've only got one slide on this.
But as I said before, it does support a
variety of link devices.
And one of the ways it does this
is that it has a capability call.
And so a link driver essentially
reports what it's capable of doing.
This link can transmit isochronous,
or perhaps this link can't
transmit isochronous.
This link does isochronous
completely independently.
This link has various levels
of queuing or whatever.
So the link capability is derived by the
link driver itself saying what it can do,
and then there are various features
in kernel which essentially use
that information to make sure
that a bus utilization is as
optimal as the link chip allows.
And it is very much the case that
some link chips allow much more
efficient use of the bus than others.
That may or may not be an issue,
but it's good to know that you actually
are going to use the bus as well as
a particular link chip does allow.
Then, in fact,
essentially it's got one API,
one main API,
which is a single command for
all of the bus sub-actions.
By the time you get
down to the link driver,
you're talking in terms of sub-actions,
not transactions.
A transaction is something
like a read request and then
the response coming back.
At this level in the link driver,
you're talking about the read request
going out or a response going out.
And the link driver has some specific
plugins for specific hardware support,
which you may well have.
The system interface API is the place at
which we try to isolate everything which
is going to be dependent on the system
and the real-time operating system.
There is a module which
is called TNF Sys.
And if you want to port to a
different operating system,
basically you go and pull out TNF Sys
and you go through it API by API and
work out exactly how the system works.
The APIs are going to be implemented
for this particular RTOS.
And Kernel is a real-time system.
It's a concurrent system.
So it does need support of concurrency,
but really there's not very much
in the way of APIs that it needs,
and they're pretty conventional,
pretty familiar.
So we have...
We have a system initialize, create task.
We use semaphore.
So you create a semaphore,
you post to a semaphore,
you pend on a semaphore.
You can create a queue, delete a queue,
you can send a message on a queue,
you can receive a message from a queue,
pend on a queue for a message.
And that essentially is the
main interface that we expect
an RTOS to provide for us.
There are memory allocation
operations as well.
Basically, there's a TNF malloc,
which in many systems just gets
implemented straightforward as malloc.
There is a facility for doing
a DMA-safe memory allocation.
In some cases,
you need to make sure that the
memory is not going to be taken
away from you by some all-powerful
memory management system,
which really has got no place
in an embedded system anyway.
And those sorts of things.
there are some system calls
for atomic operations.
But essentially, it's a pretty simple and
straightforward set of APIs,
easily portable to a new RTOS.
Moving on to the client services,
the client services support an
arbitrary number of clients.
There's no particular limit
built into the software.
In fact,
this runs through a thread through much
of TNF Kernel and the TNF software,
is that by and large,
we haven't built in artificial limits.
Instead, we've gone for things which
go and allow configuration.
So you can set limits which are
relevant to your particular application
in its particular circumstances.
And by and large,
those limits are set dynamically
rather than statically.
They are set in initialization
calls rather than hash defines.
So the typical clients are the
transport protocols for applications.
They operate independently.
They operate in parallel.
And also some of the features
that Kernel itself provides you,
such as the bus manager, the FCP,
function control protocol implementation.
Those actually are implemented, again,
as clients,
because what they want to do is
to do ordinary bus transactions.
Thank you.
So what happens is that a client,
which is one of these protocols maybe,
or maybe your own application,
a task in your own application,
will introduce itself to Kernel,
it'll log in, and it'll get a client ID.
And then it'll use that in future calls,
so Kernel can keep track of which
clients are asking for which
features and which capabilities,
which callbacks, and so on and so forth.
So the sorts of things
that a client can do,
having got its ID, is that it can sign up
for unit notification.
A unit is a capability in a
device somewhere on the bus.
And when there's a bus reset and
some new device joins the bus,
a client of TNF kernel can say,
I want to be told when an SPP2
target turns up on the bus.
I want to be told when an AVC tape
recorder turns up on the bus.
So you can sign up for unit notification.
It can sign up for cable
event notification.
For some purposes,
things like bus reset are important.
Many applications,
it's the case it doesn't matter.
And you can often get away with
your application not even knowing
about bus resets on FireWire.
But for some applications,
it is important.
And so you can sign up for that.
You can read CSR locations on 1394 nodes.
You can actually go and read the
configuration ROM on some other node.
You can go and search the
ROMs for specific entries.
Essentially, it's the same sort of thing
as client notification.
You can say,
find me a tape recorder if there is one.
And there's a whole pile of
other functions similarly.
Now, if a client wants to access a
particular device that's on the bus,
what it does is to say to the kernel,
I want to be able to do this.
Give me a device reference.
So it gets a device
reference ID from kernel.
I mean,
essentially that's a pointer to an
internal data structure of kernel.
And...
Normally it does this by, sorry,
within kernel,
kernel tracks particular devices
by global unique identifier.
The device reference remains
the same for all time.
And then the sorts of services
that Kernel provides to a device
with such a device reference is
all the asynchronous request types,
create isoquinous stream descriptors.
It can also do things like allocate
isoquinous channels and bandwidth,
sign up to receive isoquinous events,
and bus reset notifications and the like.
There are, in fact,
two sorts of device references.
One is the standard way,
the way I've been talking about so far,
where kernel tracks it all
for you and you just use an
abstract device reference.
Alternatively,
there's a type called unspecified,
which provides you maximum control.
In other words,
you can actually then go and
access a device by its specific
device address on the bus.
But that, of course,
requires you to go and
track the changes to that.
So if for some reason you don't want to
use the kernel services for doing this,
we're not sort of blocking you off
from a lower level access to the bus.
You can do that if you really wish to.
In general, you won't need to.
The reset services,
I said you can sign up for bus reset.
Well, you can sign up for all bus resets.
You can sign up for a bus reset
notification when a particular
device or unit joins the bus,
or if it leaves the bus.
There's some initialization you do.
You can set the number of outstanding
requests in the outbound request queue.
You can set the number of incoming
requests that can be queued.
You can set the number
of client procedures.
And these basically just limit
the internal data structures that
the kernel will build for itself.
One minor point I should make when
we're talking about request queues.
The kernel model to its clients is
that outbound requests are queued.
And yes, they are queued.
But in fact,
it turns out that they're not
queued actually in the kernel.
The kernel goes and passes on the queuing
responsibilities to the link driver.
And that might seem a
rather odd thing to do,
because it makes link drivers
more difficult to write.
But it turns out that
there are some link chips,
and more and more link chips,
which basically support
queuing in hardware.
OHCI is a very good example,
but there are others as well.
So by passing on the queuing
responsibilities down to the link driver,
this allows the link driver in
turn to take advantage of any
queuing capabilities that might be
in the hardware of the particular
chip that it's a driver for.
You want to be able to
configure the node as well.
What's this node doing?
You can set its OUI.
You can set busy retry codes,
appending controls and things,
say whether you want to do appendings,
app busies or whatever.
And then there's a whole
pile of optional features,
which you can decide whether they're
going to go into your device or not.
And of course, these are optional
features which are dynamic.
So you can build bus registries,
you can contend for being bus manager,
you can decide that this device
is going to be a bus manager,
or potentially,
you can optimize gap count,
decide that it's going to
be isochronous capable,
power manager capable,
and so on and so forth.
You can decide it's
going to be cycle master.
As I said, these are dynamic,
which means that you can build
software which maybe itself goes
and loads capabilities dynamically.
And so, you know,
for some time you may decide that you
don't want to be ISOP and resource
manager capable or something until some
other software has actually managed to
get loaded or something of that sort.
So you can decide as the capabilities
come and go whether you wish to
have these features advertised
and these capabilities supported.
Another class of services that are
provided are to be able to access the
fire chips that are across the bus.
Your local chip or a remote chip.
So you can do things like set the
force root bit to persuade a particular
device that it wants to be root.
You can send a link on which goes
and turns on the link layer device,
link layer hardware in a remote device.
You can set gap counts.
You can ping nodes.
You can engage and suspend,
resume power management stuff,
enable fire ports.
And you can read and write
remote fire registers.
So if you have a need for being able
to access fire chips across the bus,
you can do that.
Now, I have to admit,
the main user of this is
going to be a bus manager,
which is in kernel anyway.
So it's unlikely that you will
actually need these services,
but they're there if you do.
And they're the ones that are going
to be used by some of the other
features that kernel provides anyway.
Looking at this sort of
from the other way around,
you can be a target device
advertising a CSR ROM,
and so we provide the capabilities
to build the CSR ROM and to modify or
add units to the CSR ROM dynamically.
So essentially,
if a read to CSR ROM comes into the node,
then Kernel will actually provide
the response based on what you've
asked Kernel to set up in CSR ROM.
And your application doesn't actually
directly get involved in servicing
those CSR read and write commands,
unless for some reason it wants to.
It can choose to,
but in general it won't want to.
There's a direct memory client.
This allows you to designate an area of
your memory and hand it over to kernel.
and say, well,
what I want you to do is to allow
access to this area of memory from
remote devices across the bus.
So reason writes to this area of memory.
We'll go straight to that memory.
And by and large,
your application needn't get involved.
Now, sometimes this can be directly
supported by hardware.
OHDI has a facility for supporting this.
Some other link chips can support
this sort of thing as well.
Otherwise, it's supported by software.
But then the question is, okay,
so there are other devices reading
and writing from this lump of memory.
There are going to be times
when I do actually want to be
able to know what's going on,
put things in that memory,
get things out of that memory.
So what I'd like is,
I'd like to be told when other
devices do access that memory.
I can be told, I can say,
I want to be told every time.
I want to be told never.
Or perhaps I want to be
told every N packets.
So if there are N packets
that are read from memory,
then I'm going to go back
and I'm going to go and fill
it up with some more stuff.
Or perhaps every N bytes that
are read from that memory,
or written to that memory,
I want to be told.
And there's optional
support for posted writes.
In other words,
a posted write is one where
the transaction comes in...
and it's acknowledged
with an at-complete.
Even before the data
that's in that transaction,
that write transaction,
has been physically pasted in the memory,
the device at the far end
thinks it's got there.
And that's a good optimization which
is used quite a lot in FireWire.
So the kernel sends the right complete
whatever may be needed to finish that.
For isoquinous services,
you can allocate and deallocate
channels and bandwidth.
You can initialize an isoquinous stream,
you can start an isoquinous stream,
you can stop one.
and then you can sign up for
isochronous event notification.
And the sorts of events are
start of isochronous data,
end of isochronous data,
and then some odd things to
do with channels and managing
what happens with cycle starts.
The FCP services,
those are the underpinning
services for AVC,
and the functions that are
provided there are to send an
FCP command or an FCP response.
You have to be careful.
An FCP response is not
a serial bus response.
FCP uses directed writes in its protocol,
and one FCP initiator will send an
FCP directed write to the target,
and then the target will
send an FCP response,
which is an FCP directed write,
back to the initiator.
So you can send
FCP commands or responses.
You can add an FCP command
handler for incoming commands.
You can add a response handler.
And then there are plugs which
you can deal with as well.
Odd little features of the way
that kernel's been put together.
Little Endian, big Endian support,
whatever processor you
happen to be using.
Sort of whatever reasonable size
processor you happen to be using.
There are some compile
time optimizations.
So, for example,
if you decide that you're never, never,
ever going to be bus manager,
you needn't compile it in.
And a few things of that sort in
order to get the footprint down.
And there is this multi-threaded,
multi-tasking support.
So, how do you use Kernel?
Well, the steps are...
that first of all, you configure it.
You configure kernel,
your application sort of at the
master application level goes and
sets the various queue sizes,
the various parameters that are needed.
- You then complete
the node configuration.
You say whether you want the
node to be bus manager capable,
IRM, whatever.
Then you create CSR ROM,
ready for the various clients that
are going to want to advertise
their capabilities in CSI ROM.
Around about that time,
TNF goes and gets capabilities
of the link driver and does
a link driver configuration.
And then your various clients,
protocol clients,
will individually register
for required services.
So basically you go and set the
clients going as independent
tasks in your application,
and they'll go and register
for their services.
And then you just sit back and enjoy it,
watch it all work.
So that's Kernel.
Second module that I'd like to
introduce you to is TNF AVC.
And this provides an API for
AVC controllers and AVC targets.
And actually, this presentation,
this part of the presentation
feels just like the previous
part of the presentation.
It's the same model all over again.
Same sorts of things,
same feel all over again.
First of all,
we're supporting multiple sub-units,
so your AVC device can have several
personalities simultaneously.
There are notification mechanisms for
AVC-related bus and remote unit events.
You can construct appropriate
unit and sub-unit descriptors
if you're an AVC target to go
into your configuration ROM.
You publicize your AVC unit directory.
You can be a controller,
and AVC provides support for
parsing the descriptors that
you'll find in some other target
somewhere else on the device.
And again,
the API provides references to units
and sub-units and plugs and so on and
so forth by logical references which
will remain unchanged through bus resets
and through things which might actually
change the physical representation
of these as known on FireWire.
So again,
it insulates the application or the
higher-level protocol from those changes.
Thank you.
AVC supports AVC 3.0,
the 1394 Trade Association specification.
It provides a complete set of
APIs for both controllers and targets,
multiple sub-units.
It does automatic mapping of
addresses and plugs and so on
and so forth after bus reset.
provides dynamic
construction of descriptors.
And there are also some interesting
rules for open and closed descriptors.
And again, it ensures that those
rules are complied with.
It provides IEC 61883
connection management.
It provides support for FCP or
asynchronous connections
for command transport.
Both of those are used in
different circumstances.
You can have multiples of
those command transports,
multiple outstanding transactions,
and a target can service
multiple controllers.
It's quite an important feature.
and multiple devices outside on the
bus can find that this is a target.
And it won't fall over if two or three
of them start trying to poke at it.
So the block diagram amazingly looks
just like the previous block diagram.
AVC sitting down here,
it's got its interface to kernel
using those kernel APIs that
I was talking about a moment ago.
It's got its interface to TNF Sys,
and its interface then provides the
APIs to the particular protocols,
particular AVC protocols
that you want to support.
And again, the sort of the block
diagram looks similar.
We have our various services
essentially going between the AVC device
API and the transport controller,
which goes down to kernel.
System API, actually hardly used at all.
The only thing that it does is
to provide memory allocation.
It goes TNF malloc for memory allocation.
Incidentally,
I should have mentioned that the fact
that TNF Malak is provided and that
everything that we provide in FireWire
Reference Platform goes through TNF Malak
means that you can choose just to
go and call Malak if you want to.
But if there's some good reason why
you want to control the memory areas
that are used for all of the FireWire
Reference Platform data structures
and buffers and so on and so forth,
you can go and implement your own special
version of TNF Malak with your own
specific system-dependent capabilities.
And the rest of the FireWire
Reference Platform will just go
and use that all automatically.
Thank you.
Support multiple transports and
we support them simultaneously.
You don't get any deadlocks
or anything horrible like that
as a result of doing this.
You want to access a
particular target device,
a particular target unit that's
somewhere else on the bus,
you go and get an AVC reference ID.
And then you'll use that in
all future calls to go and make
accesses to that target device,
getting its unit information,
sub-unit information, plug information,
and so on and so forth.
Now, if you look at the layers of
connection management protocols
that are defined for FireWire,
there's a set of protocols called
connection management protocols,
which uses this model of a plug.
So two devices sort of share a
plug if they're going to send
asynchronous data to each other.
And that's supported in kernel.
Then what AVC does is that it extends
that model so that if you push into a
device and you get to some sub-units,
essentially you put a plug on a
sub-unit and you plug that to some
other sub-unit in some other device.
And in fact, you can even go and plug one
sub-unit to another sub-unit on the
same device if you really want to.
So AVC, in general,
goes and extends this model
to sub-units from just units.
And so our AVC supports all of that.
So we find ourselves being able to do
things like configure the output plugs,
master plugs, configure the input plugs,
connect and disconnect plugs,
the serial blast plugs, if you like,
at the device level.
And most important of all, perhaps,
is that we can connect and disconnect
between sub-unit plugs and other
sub-unit plugs and or unit plugs.
So you can sort of plug your
system together whatever
way around is appropriate.
All references to a device are
made by a device reference ID.
and you can then go and get the
various units and information
from an ABC reference.
We have basically, again,
references for units and
for sub-units and for plugs.
So all of that, again,
is handled in a way which
won't change over bus resets,
won't change over 1394 topology
changes or reconfigurations.
So essentially, what you do is to
initialize an AVC device.
You say it's going to be a controller,
it's going to be a target,
or perhaps it's going to be both.
You register for the unit event
notifications that you're interested in.
You deal with sub-units.
You can construct AVC command headers
for sending commands to other devices.
And you can get plug references.
If you're a target...
Then you can create a target unit
with a reference ID for yourself.
You can create sub-units
within your target.
You can create AVC plugs,
and you can register to
be a command handler.
And you'd want to do this because
somebody else on the bus is going to
send you as a target an AVC command.
So you can have a command handler
which goes and deals with that
AVC command when it comes across.
So that's a look at AVC.
And finally, another protocol is SPP2.
This is just slightly
different from the other two,
but it gives you, again,
to give you a feel for the sorts
of software and the sorts of ways
we've gone about constructing the
support for various protocols in
the FireWire Reference Platform.
I do want to emphasize,
in this presentation,
I'm talking about SPP2 Target.
We provide excellent support for both
SPP2 Initiators and for SPP2 Targets.
And the fact that I'm picking out on
Target for this presentation is simply
a matter of my time and your patience.
So, SPP2 target, well,
we provide full target support.
It's a generic API for
all types of SPP2 targets,
disks, printers, whatever you like,
plotters.
SPP2 is defined in end sites 325,
and it's fully compliant with that.
And of course,
it operates as a client of TNF kernel.
So in this particular case,
it only uses the TNF kernel APIs.
It's operating system independent.
It uses the TNF malloc,
and I think it uses TNF DMA safe.
So it's using the main
APIs that we provide,
no others.
It'll run in any environment
in which TNF kernel runs then.
It provides callback functions
for CSR event handling.
So in fact, the application does,
in this case, have to get involved.
And this is one of those
cases where actually a bus
reset has to be significant.
Unfortunately,
a bus reset is a significant event as
far as a client of SPP2 is concerned.
We can't hide the bus resets.
Full range of configuration
functions and buffers as needed
are allocated dynamically.
And that's whenever some initiator
across the bus goes and initiates
a session with this target.
At that point,
we then go and allocate all the
necessary buffers for that particular
login that the initiator has made.
So the architecture for this is, well,
here's kernel.
Here's SPP2 API.
[Transcript missing]
The system task deals with CSR accesses,
control and status ROM accesses.
So this is where an initiator is
finding out about this SPP2 target,
what it's capable of and what
it can do and what it can't do.
There's a management agent,
and that deals with initiator login.
A device across the bus
logs into an SPP2 target,
logs into the disk or whatever,
before it starts to do reads
and writes to that disk.
So this management agent
task deals with those logins.
Then the application
tasks deal with ORBS,
Operation Request Block Processing.
So the actual requests to go and
read blocks from disk or whatever,
for disks it would tend to
be a command protocol such as
the... I've forgotten its name.
There's a specific command
protocol for disks.
That interpretation would have to
be done by the application task,
which you, the application writer,
would write.
And we have to issue a sort of
little health warning here as well.
There are some aspects of SPP2
compliance which actually depend on
appropriate application behavior.
We're not able to shield
you entirely from these.
And so, for example,
every time the initiator sends
you an operation request block,
you are required to return
status for that block.
And we rely on the application
doing that correctly.
But the reason why we've done this
is to allow application flexibility.
But we do have a sample
target application.
You can actually go and run the
application code and do accesses
to a real disk if you wish to,
so that you can see how to
implement a compliant application.
[Transcript missing]
Although this is sitting
on top of kernel,
there's nothing in this which prevents
the application from getting directly
to the kernel APIs if it wishes to.
For the data transfer APIs,
one of the things we do
provide is automatic support
for initiator page tables.
In other words, in the SPP model,
there are various models of when
you're sending writes across the bus,
exactly where they go to and how
you deal with the fact that the
initiator might have page tables
or might have a linear memory.
And the code that we provide
actually deals with that.
Essentially, the API to the application
is a start data transfer,
and then our code determines whether
a page table or direct memory is being
used and translates that into the
appropriate bus transactions to be able
to enable the right thing to occur.
So the application will make repeated
calls to rebuffer or write buffer,
and then call stop data transfer.
Status APIs.
There are various times when an
application needs to send status.
There's a thing for
sending unsolicited status.
You need to send status in
response to our orbs that come in,
and command error and orb error statuses.
In order to achieve these functions,
the application provides
some event handlers,
and we'll have a quick
look at the management and
command agent event handlers.
The event handler is provided
when there's real work to be done.
For example, operation request blocks.
An event handler for
things like bus reset.
And some of the event
handlers are optional.
So the configuration of these
callbacks works by the application
calling SPP2 target initializer,
target init, with one callback parameter,
which is called onOpenSession.
So the idea here is that whenever an
initiator initiates a new session,
then this callback will be provided.
and the login descriptors provided
as a parameter to that callback.
Entries for all the other callbacks
that you might need are provided
within that data structure.
So on the on open session callback,
you initiate those entries,
which are then set up according to
however your application wants to
configure all those other callbacks
for this particular session.
So you can actually use
different callbacks for different
sessions if you wish to.
So the callback functions
are on open session,
on end session, set password,
abort task set, reset target.
All buffer-full stuff to do.
Get on with it, please.
There's Doorbell,
which basically says go and read the
host descriptors for more commands.
You needn't actually do
anything about Doorbell in the
application if you don't want to.
You can rely on the SVP2
code doing that for you.
There are also some callbacks
that may be called as a result of
internal conditions like agent dead,
bus reset, unit attention.
So that's a quick look at SPP2.
And just as a final slide,
the FireWire Reference
Platform is available on the web.
You can go download it.
There are some mailing lists
where people who are using this
are putting all their experience,
questions,
and indeed swapping their own good hints
as to how to make best use of this.
So that's the end of a quick
gander through all the facilities
that are provided in the
FireWire Reference Platform.